

===== PAGE 47 =====

NOTES BY MR. OLMSTED.

The few notes which I propose to append to Mr. Gardner's report
will be directed to a single point.

There are those, and J fear that most of the people of Niagara are
among them, to whom it appears that the waterfall have so supreme an
interest to the public that what happens to the adjoining scenery is of
trifling consequence. Were all the trees cut away, quarries opened in
the ledges, the banks packed with hotels and factories, and every chance-
open space occupied by a circus tent, the falls would still, these think,
draw the world to them. Whatever has been done to the injury of the
scenery has been done, say they, with the motive of profit, and the profit
realized is the public’s verdict of acquittal.

It must be considered, therefore, that the public has not had the case
fairly before it.

The great body of visitors to Niagara come as strangers. Their move-
ments are necessarily controlled by the arrangements made for them.
They take what is offered, and pay what is required with little exercise
of choice. The fact that they accept the arrangements is no evidence of
their approval.

The real question is, how, in the long run, is the general experience of visit-
ors affected by measures and courses which are determined with no regard to
the influence of’ the scenery ?

I have myself been an occasional visitor at Niagara for forty-five years.
My attention was first called to the rapidly approaching ruin of its
characteristic scenery by Mr. F. E. Church, about ten years ago.
Shortly afterwards, several gentlemen, frequenters of the Falls, met at
my request, to consider this danger, one of them being a member of the
Commission now reporting on the subject. I have thus had both occasion
and opportunity for observing the changed courses into which the public
has been gradually led and of studying these courses and their results.

When the arrangements by which visitors were conducted were yet
simple; when there were few carriages, and these little used; when
a visit to the Falls was a series of expeditions, and in each expedition
hours were occupied in wanderiug slowly among the trees, going from
place to place, with many intervals of rest, there was not only a
much greater degree of enjoyment, there was a different kind of enjoy-
ment from any now generally obtained. People, then, were loth to leave
the place; many lingered on from day to day after they had prepared

d
to go, revisiting ground they had gone over before, turning and return-
| = a od ro} ? co)


===== PAGE 48 =====

28 [SENATE,

ing; and when they went away it was with grateful hearts and grateful
words.

The change from this to what is described in the second section of the
Commissioners’ report has been gradual and, while something must be
attributed to modern ease of travel, a gre ater influx of visitors and to
habits of quicker movement and gre eater restlessness ; much must also
be referred to the fact that visitors are so much more constrained to be
guided and instructed, to be led and stopped, to be “put through,” and
so little left to natural and healthy individual intuitions.

The aim to make money by the showman’s methods; the idea that
Niagara is a spectacular and sensational exhibition, of which rope-walk-
ing, diving, brass bands, fireworks and various “ side-shows” are appro-
priate accompaniments, is so presented to the visitor that he is forced to
yield to it, and see and feel little else than that prescribed to him.

But all the time there are some who, because of better information and
opportunities, and as the result of previous training, get the better of this
difficulty, and to these the old charm remains. Take, as an illustration,
the experience of the writer of the following passage. It is that of a
man who has traveled extensively for the express purpose of observing
scenery and comparing the value, as determined by the influence on the
imagination, of different types of scenery. It is recorded in a little book
which treats more especially of the scenery of the Alps and of what are
designated ‘‘nature’s gardens” among them.* But says the author:

“The noblest of nature's gardens that I have yet seen is that of the sur-
roundings and neighborhood of the Falls of Niage ara. Grand as are the
colossal fal ls, the rapids and the course of the river for a considerable
distance above and below possess more interest and beauty.

‘As the river conrses far below the falls, confined between vast walls
of rock—the clear water of a peculiar light-greenish hue, and white here
and there with circlets of yet unsoothed foam—the effect, is startlingly
beautiful, quite apart from the falls. The high cliffs are crested
with woods; the ruins of the great rock walls forming wide, irregular
banks between them and the water, are also beautifully clothed “with
wood to the river's edge, often so far below that you sometimes look from
the upper brink down on the top of tall pines that seem diminished in
size. The wild vines scramble among the trees; many shrubs and
flowers seam the high rocks; in moist spots, here and there a sharp eye
may detect many flowered tufts of the beautiful fringed Gentian, strange
to Kuropean eyes; and beyond all, and at the upper end of the wood-
embowered deep river bed, a portion of the crowning glory of the
scene — the falls —a vast cliff of illuminated foam, with a zone towards
its upper edge as of green molten glass. Above the falls the scene is
quite different. A wide and peaceful river carrying the surplus waters
of an inland sea, till it gradually finds itself in the coils of the rapids,
and is soon lashed into ‘such a turmoil as we: might expect if a dozen
unpolluted Shannons or Seines were running a race together. A river
no more, but.a sea unreined. By walking about a mile above the falls
on the Canadian shore this effect is finely seen, the breadth of the river
helping to carry out the illusion. As the great waste of waters descends
from its dark grey and smooth bed and falls whitening into foam, it
seems as if tide after tide were yale-heaped one on auother on a sea
strand. The islands just above the falls enable one. to stand in the

* Alpine Flowers, by William Robinson, F. L.S. -London: John Murray, 1875.


===== PAGE 49 =====

ISLAND.

GOAT

OF

S

JODS

x
WwW
“a
<
a |
a

(8

W

IN) TALE


===== PAGE 50 =====




===== PAGE 51 =====

No. 37.] 29

midst of these rapids, where they rush by lashed into passionate haste ;
now boiling over some hidden swellings in the rocky bed, or dashing
over greater but yet hidden obstructions with such force that the crest of
the uplifted mass is dashed about as freely as a white charger’s mane;
now darkly falling into a cavity several yards below the level of the
surrounding water, and, when unobstructed, surging by in countless
eddies to the mist-crested falls below; and so rapidly that the driftwood
dashes on swift as swallow on the wing. Undisturbed in their peaceful
shadiness, garlanded with wild vine and wild flowers, the islands stand
in the midst of all this fierce commotion of waters— below, the vast
ever-mining falls; above, a complication of torrents that seem fitted to
wear away iron shores; yet there they stand, safe as if the spirit of
beauty had in mercy exempted them from decay. Several islets are so
small that it is really remarkable how they support vegetation; one,
looking no bigger than a washing-tub, not only holds its own in the very
thick of the torrents just above the falls, but actually bears a small
forest, including one stricken and half cast-down pine. Most fortunate
is it that these beautifully verdant islands and islets occur just above
the falls, adding immeasurably to the effect of the scene.”

I have spoken of the distinctive charms of Niagara scenery. If it
were possible to have the same conditions detached from the falls
(which it is not, as I shall show), Niagara would still be a place of sing-
ular fascination; possibly to some, upon whom the falls have a terrify-
ing effect, even more so than it is now.

Saying nothing of the infinitely varied beauties of water and spray,
and of water-worn rock, I will, for a purpose, mention a few elements
which contribute to this distinctive charm.

The eminent English botanist, Sir Joseph Hooker, has said that he
found upon Goat Island a greater variety of vegetation within a given
space than anywhere in Europe, or east of the Sierras, in America;
and the first of American botanists, Dr. Asa Gray, has repeated the
statement. I have followed the Apalachian chain almost from end to
end, and traveled on horseback, ‘‘in search of the picturesque,” over four
thousand miles of the most promising parts of the continent without find-
ing elsewhere the same quality of forest beauty which was once abun-
dant about the falls, and which is still to be.observed in those parts of
Goat Island where the original growth of trees and shrubs has not been
disturbed, and where, from caving banks, trees are not now exposed to
excessive dryness at the root.

Nor have I found any where else such tender effects of foliage as were
once to be seen in the drapery hanging down the wall of rock on the
American shore below the fall, and rolling up the slope below it, or with
that still to be seen in a favorable season and under favorable lights, on
the Canadian steeps and crags between the falls and the ferry.

All these distinctive qualities,—the great variety of the indigenous
perennials and annuals, the rare beauty of the old woods, and the exceed-
ing loveliness of the ro¢k foliage,—I believe to be a direct effect of the
falls, and as much a part of its majesty as the mist-cloud and the rain-
bow.

They are all, as it appears to me, to be explained by the circumstance
that at two periods of the year when the northern American forest else-


===== PAGE 52 =====

30 [Senate, No. 37.1

where is liable to suffer actual constitutional depressions, that of
Niagara is insured against like ills, and thus retains youthful luxuriance
to an unusual age.

First, the masses of ice, which, every winter are piled to a great
height below the falls, and the great rushing body of ice-cold water
coming from the northern lakes in the spring, prevent at Niagara the
hardship under which trees elsewhere often suffer through sudden
checks to premature growth; and, second, when droughts elsewhere
occur, as they do, every few years, of such severity that trees in full
foliage droop and dwindle, and even sometimes cast their leaves, the
atmosphere at Niagara is more or less moistened by the constantly
evaporating spray of the falls, and in certain situations frequently
bathed by drifting clouds of mist.

Something of the beauty of the hanging foliage below the falls is also
probably due to the fact, that the effect of the frozen spray upon it is
equivalent to the horticultural process of ‘‘ shortening in;” compelling a
denser and closer growth than is, under other circumstances, natural.

Reference is made at page 9, of the Commissioners’ report, to a marvel-
ous effect in scenery above the Falls. © It is that to which the following
account by the Duke of Argyle applies:

“The river Niagara, above the falls, rans in a channel very broad,
and very little depressed below the general level of the country. But
there is a steep declivity in the bed of the stream for a considerable dis-
tance above the precipice, and this constitutes what are called the rapids.
The consequence is that when we stand at any point near the edge of
the Falls, and look up the course of the stream, the foaming waters of
the rapids constitute the sky line. No indication of land is visible—
nothing to express the fact that we are looking at a river. The crests of
the breakers, the leaping aud the rushing of the waters, are still seen
against the clouds, as they are seen in the ocean, when the ship from
which we look is in the trough of the sea. It is impossible to resist the
effect on the imagination. It is as if the fountains of the great deep
were being broken up, and that a new deluge were coming on the world.
The impression is rather increased than diminished, by the perspective
of the low wooded banks on either shore, ranning down to a vanishing
point and seeming to be lost in the advancing waters. An apparently
shoreless sea tumbling toward one is a very grand and a very awful
sight. Forgetting, then, what oue knows, and giving oneself to what one
only sees, I do not know that there is anything in nature more majestic
than the view of the rapids above the falls of Niagara.”

FREDERICK LAW OLMSTED.
